Introduction to SQL
SQL, Structured Query Language, is a programming language designed to manage data stored in relational databases. SQL operates through simple, declarative statements. This keeps data accurate and secure, and helps maintain the integrity of databases, regardless of size.

The SQL language is widely used today across web frameworks and database applications. Knowing SQL gives you the freedom to explore your data, and the power to make better decisions. By learning SQL, you will also learn concepts that apply to nearly every data storage system.

The statements covered in this course use SQLite Relational Database Management System (RDBMS). You can also access a glossary of all the SQL commands taught in this course.

CREATE TABLE table_name ( id int, name text, age integer)
'''
CREATE TABLE celebs (
   id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, 
   name TEXT UNIQUE,
   date_of_birth TEXT NOT NULL,
   date_of_death TEXT DEFAULT 'Not Applicable'
);
'''
INSERT INTO table_name (id, name, age) values (1,'dd',3)
SELECT * FROM table_name

The ALTER TABLE statement adds a new column to a table.
ALTER TABLE celebs 
ADD COLUMN twitter_handle TEXT;

UPDATE celebs 
SET twitter_handle = '@taylorswift13' 
WHERE id = 4; 

DELETE FROM celebs 
WHERE twitter_handle IS NULL;


CREATE TABLE creates a new table.
INSERT INTO adds a new row to a table.
SELECT queries data from a table.
ALTER TABLE changes an existing table.
UPDATE edits a row in a table.
DELETE FROM deletes rows from a table.


CREATE INDEX <index_name>
ON <table_name> (column1, column2, ...)


SELECT name
FROM movies 
WHERE imdb_rating IS [NOT] NULL;

BETWEEN 'D' AND 'F' should not be the condition because it would return names that begin with ‘D’ and ‘E’, but not ‘F’ (unless there was a movie with the single letter name of “F”).
In this statement, BETWEEN filters the result set to only include movies with names that begin with the letter ‘A’ up to, but not including ones that begin with ‘J’.

SELECT *
FROM movies
WHERE name BETWEEN 'A' AND 'J';

Remember, BETWEEN two numbers is inclusive of the second number.


SELECT *
FROM movies
ORDER BY imdb_rating DESC
LIMIT 3 ;


SELECT name,
 CASE
  WHEN imdb_rating > 8 THEN 'Fantastic'
  WHEN imdb_rating > 6 THEN 'Poorly Received'
  ELSE 'Avoid at All Costs'
 END AS 'Review'
FROM movies;


SELECT price, 
   ROUND(AVG(downloads)),
   COUNT(*)
FROM fake_apps

GROUP BY price
having COUNT(*)>=10;

Find all the users that have successfully made a payment to Codeflix and find their total amount paid.

Sort them by their total payments (from high to low).

Use SUM(), WHERE, GROUP BY, and ORDER BY.
SELECT user_id, sum(amount) as total from payments 
WHERE status = 'paid'
GROUP BY user_id
order by 2 DESC;

Generate a table of user ids and total watch duration for users who watched more than 400 minutes of content.

Use SUM(), GROUP BY, and HAVING to achieve this.

SELECT user_id,SUM(watch_duration_in_minutes) FROM watch_history
group by user_id
having SUM(watch_duration_in_minutes)>400;

To the nearest minute, how many minutes of content were streamed on Codeflix?
SELECT ROUND(sum(watch_duration_in_minutes),0) FROM watch_history;



Of all the events in the watch_history table, what is the duration of the longest individual watch event? What is the duration of the shortest?

Use one query and rename the results to max and min.

SELECT MAX(watch_duration_in_minutes),MIN(watch_duration_in_minutes) FROM watch_history;



SELECT date, title, medium
FROM met
WHERE date in (SELECT MIN(date)
FROM met);


SELECT *
FROM orders
JOIN customers
  ON orders.customer_id = customers.customer_id;



SELECT * from newspaper 
LEFT JOIN online
on newspaper.id=online.id;


SELECT * from newspaper 
LEFT JOIN online
on newspaper.id=online.id
where online.id is null;


another table.

For instance, if we had a table of shirts and a table of pants, we might want to know all the possible combinations to create different outfits.

Our code might look like this:

SELECT shirts.shirt_color,
   pants.pants_color
FROM shirts
CROSS JOIN pants;
The first two lines select the columns shirt_color and pants_color.
The third line pulls data from the table shirts.
The fourth line performs a CROSS JOIN with pants.
Notice that cross joins don’t require an ON statement. You’re not really joining on any columns!

If we have 3 different shirts (white, grey, and olive) and 2 different pants (light denim and black), the results might look like this:

shirt_color	pants_color
white	light denim
white	black
grey	light denim
grey	black
olive	light denim
olive	black

3 shirts × 2 pants = 6 combinations!

This clothing example is fun, but it’s not very practically useful.

A more common usage of CROSS JOIN is when we need to compare each row of a table to a list of values.

Let’s return to our newspaper subscriptions. This table contains two columns that we haven’t discussed yet:

start_month: the first month where the customer subscribed to the print newspaper (i.e., 2 for February)
end_month: the final month where the customer subscribed to the print newspaper
Suppose we wanted to know how many users were subscribed during each month of the year. For each month (1, 2, 3) we would need to know if a user was subscribed. Follow the steps below to see how we can use a CROSS JOIN to solve this problem.



 SELECT premium_users.user_id,
 	months.months,
  CASE
    WHEN (
      premium_users.purchase_date <= months.months
      )
      AND
      (
        premium_users.cancel_date >= months.months
        OR
        premium_users.cancel_date IS NULL
      )
    THEN 'active'
    ELSE 'not_active'
  END AS 'status'
FROM premium_users
CROSS JOIN months;



SELECT '2017-01-01' as month
UNION
SELECT '2017-02-01' as month
UNION
SELECT '2017-03-01' as month;



DELETE FROM band_students
where id in(
  SELECT * from drama_students
);

SELECT grade
FROM band_students
WHERE 
EXISTS (
  SELECT grade
  FROM drama_students);


SELECT * 
FROM drama_students
WHERE grade = (
  SELECT grade
  FROM band_students
  WHERE id = 20);


  SELECT * FROM trips;
 
SELECT * FROM riders;
 
SELECT * FROM cars;

SELECT * from riders
cross join cars;


SELECT * from trips 
left join riders
on trips.rider_id=riders.id;

SELECT * from trips 
inner join cars
on trips.rider_id=cars.id;


What are the names of projects that were not chosen by any employees?

SELECT project_name 
FROM projects
WHERE project_id NOT IN (
   SELECT current_project
   FROM employees
   WHERE current_project IS NOT NULL);



    SELECT modal_text, 
 count(
   distinct
    CASE
    WHEN ab_group = 'control' THEN user_id
    END) AS 'control_clicks'
 FROM onboarding_modals 
 GROUP BY modal_text
 ORDER BY 1;


  SELECT modal_text, 
 count(
   distinct
    CASE
    WHEN ab_group = 'control' THEN user_id
    END) AS 'control_clicks',

    count(
   distinct
    CASE
    WHEN ab_group != 'control' THEN user_id
    END) AS 'variant_clicks'

 FROM onboarding_modals 
 GROUP BY modal_text
 ORDER BY 1;


 SELECT DISTINCT b.browse_date,
   b.user_id,
   c.user_id IS NOT NULL AS 'is_checkout',
   p.user_id IS NOT NULL AS 'is_purchase'
FROM browse AS 'b'
LEFT JOIN checkout 'c'
  ON c.user_id = b.user_id
LEFT JOIN purchase 'p'
  ON p.user_id = c.user_id
LIMIT 50;



WITH funnels AS (
  SELECT DISTINCT b.browse_date,
     b.user_id,
     c.user_id IS NOT NULL AS 'is_checkout',
     p.user_id IS NOT NULL AS 'is_purchase'
  FROM browse AS 'b'
  LEFT JOIN checkout AS 'c'
    ON c.user_id = b.user_id
  LEFT JOIN purchase AS 'p'
    ON p.user_id = c.user_id)
SELECT COUNT(*) AS 'num_browse',
        SUM(is_checkout) AS 'num_checkout',
        SUM(is_purchase) AS 'num_purchase',
        1.0 * SUM(is_checkout) / COUNT(user_id),
1.0 * SUM(is_purchase) / SUM(is_checkout)
FROM funnels;




WITH enrollments AS 
(SELECT *
FROM subscriptions
WHERE subscription_start < '2017-01-01'
AND (
  (subscription_end >= '2017-01-01')
  OR (subscription_end IS NULL)
)),

status AS 
(SELECT 
CASE
  WHEN (subscription_end > '2017-01-31')
    OR (subscription_end IS NULL) THEN 0
  ELSE 1
  END as is_canceled,
CASE
  WHEN (subscription_start < '2017-01-01')
    AND (
      (subscription_end >= '2017-01-01')
        OR (subscription_end IS NULL)
    ) THEN 1
    ELSE 0
  END as is_active
FROM enrollments
)
SELECT 1.0 * SUM(is_canceled)/SUM(is_active) FROM status;


 select user_id,MAX(timestamp) AS 'last_touch_at' from page_visits  
where user_id=10069
 group by user_id;



 SELECT 
   month,
   change_in_followers,
   SUM(change_in_followers) OVER (
      ORDER BY month
   ) AS 'running_total'
FROM
   social_media
WHERE
   username = 'instagram';


SELECT 
   month,
   change_in_followers,
   SUM(change_in_followers) OVER (
      ORDER BY month
   ) AS 'running_total',
   AVG(change_in_followers) OVER (
      ORDER BY month
   ) AS 'running_avg',
   COUNT(change_in_followers) OVER (
      ORDER BY month
   ) AS 'running_count'
FROM
   social_media
WHERE
   username = 'instagram';



SELECT 
    username,
    month,
    change_in_followers,
    SUM(change_in_followers) OVER (
      PARTITION BY username 
      ORDER BY month
    ) 'running_total_followers_change',
    AVG(change_in_followers) OVER (
      PARTITION BY username 
      ORDER BY month
    ) 'running_avg_followers_change'
FROM
    social_media;



    SELECT 
   ntile(4) OVER (
     partition by week
      ORDER BY streams_millions DESC
   ) AS 'quartile', 
   artist, 
   week,
   streams_millions
FROM
   streams;


SELECT strftime('%d', order_date) AS 'order_day',
  COUNT(*) 
FROM bakery 
GROUP BY 1
ORDER BY 2 DESC;



SELECT
    first_name,
    last_name,
    department_name,
    salary,
    LAST_VALUE (CONCAT(first_name,' ',last_name)) OVER (
        PARTITION BY department_name
        ORDER BY salary
        RANGE BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND 
        UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING
    ) highest_salary
FROM
    employees e
    INNER JOIN departments d 
        ON d.department_id = e.department_id;


Using a subquery, find out which students in math are in the same grade level as the student with id 7.


select * from math_students
where grade in (
select grade  from math_students
where student_id = 7);


Interview Prep Problems: Code Challenge 8Narrative and Instructions
Learn
INTERVIEW PREP PROBLEMS
Code Challenge 8
The math_students and english_students tables have the following columns:

student_id - the student id
grade - the grade level of the student
first_name - the student’s first name
last_name - the student’s last name
Instructions
1.
Using a subquery, find all students enrolled in english class who are not also enrolled in math class.

Checkpoint 2 Passed

Stuck? Get a hint
2.
Using a subquery, find out what grade levels are represented in both the math and english classes.

Checkpoint 3 Passed

Hint
SELECT grade
FROM math_students
WHERE EXISTS (
  SELECT grade
  FROM english_students
);


SELECT ROW_NUMBER()
OVER (
  ORDER BY gross
) AS 'row_num', title, week, gross
FROM box_office;


SELECT strftime('%H',purchase_date) 
     AS 'Hour',
   COUNT(strftime('%H',purchase_date)) 
     AS 'Purchases'
FROM purchases 
GROUP BY 1 
ORDER BY 2 desc;